---
title: The Adventures of Spider
source: https://www.amazon.com/Dreamtime-Aboriginal-Stories-Oodgeroo-Nunukul/dp/0688132960
category: Bibliographies
---
<p>Arkhurst, J. C. (1964). The adventures of spider West African folk tales. Boston: Little, Brown.</p>
<p>Joyce Arkhurst has collected six stories told in Ghana and Liberia about the origin of a spider. Each story explains why and how Spider came to look and act the way that is familiar to the listener. The stories are in chronological order of how Spider came to look the way he does. These are stories that are well known to listeners in Ghana and Liberia. Joyce Arkhurst gathered them through her travels in these countries. She is qualified for this collection based on her ethnic and familial ties to the region and her work as a storyteller in the New York Public Library system. These stories were collected when chiefs of the tribes learned Joyce Arkhurst's interest in collecting folk stories and had their storytellers share. These stories were written down and collected while the storyteller told them to the entire tribe. A listening audience can hear this collection of stories in the same manner that the tribes in Ghana and Liberia heard them. Joyce Arkhurst writes the stories down to allow a storyteller to continue the storytelling tradition with these tales easily.  This collection starts with an introduction that creates the atmosphere Joyce Arkhurst saw and experienced in Liberia and Ghana. There are no cultural or source notes. Potentially an addition of a cultural introduction would ease in readers who are not familiar with the region. There is also an absence of any addenda. Overall, the adventures of spider is a collection of stories that audiences of all ages will enjoy. Especially, elementary-age children will find it more entertaining as they hear of Spider's antics in each tale.</p>
