---
title: Hidden Stories In Plants
layout: default
source: https://www.amazon.com/Dreamtime-Aboriginal-Stories-Oodgeroo-Nunukul/dp/0688132960
category: Bibliographies
---
<p>Pellowski, A. (1990). Hidden stories in plants: Unusual and easy-to-tell stories from around the world, together with creative things to do while telling them. New York: Macmillan.</p>
<p>Anne Pellowski's collection of Hidden stories in plants includes forty stories organized into five sections. These sections are by what type of craft the listener can make using some of the stories' plants. The five sections are ornaments, disguises, playthings, dolls, and musical instruments. Within this collection, the tales range in length from smaller anecdotes to longer stories. A storyteller can share all of the stories with an audience. However, some of the tales would better be utilized within a home setting or in a plant-focused storytelling setting where multiple tales are shared. These stories are labeled as either legends, fables, tales, folklore, or myth, depending on their labeling in their earliest writings. The sections begin with a collection of stories, then the following part of the section being creative ideas to do and make with different parts of nature. The parts that entail making things out of plants include directions, what plants would work best, and illustrations to assist. At the beginning of the book collection, there is an introduction and a note to read before picking plants. Both of these aspects inform the storyteller that if they lead a nature walk or activity based on the stories and activities, there are some plants to avoid as they are endangered or poisonous. Each part of the collection has an introduction for both the stories and for the craft portion. At the end of the book collection, there is a bibliography for the stories share, a section to locate additional stories, and holidays that some of the stories work best. Anne Pellowski's collection of stories and activities will appeal to elementary-aged children. Although, some tales would appeal to an older audience.</p>
